Refactor java SDK and configuration (#4966)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/java/sdk.md

---
title: Manage Telemetry with SDK

> linkTitle: Manage Telemetry with SDK

Reviewer: A `linkTitle` is meant to be short. How about:

```suggestion
linkTitle: SDK
```

Reviewer 2: While "Manage Telemetry with SDK" is very long, I don't like this being shortened to "SDK", since endusers will not understand what to expect from clicking that in the navigation, see my [discussion comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/discussions/4853#discussioncomment-10212657) on that topic as well. 

The problem is that we need both (the manage part and the "SDK") to be clear what will behind that link in the navigation. Personally, I would prefer "Manage Telemetry" over "SDK", but I can imagine that people think otherwise.

Author: > Personally, I would prefer "Manage Telemetry" over "SDK", but I can imagine that people think otherwise.

Yeah I think we need both. We need the "SDK" for users who are already familiar with opentelemetry concepts, since it isn't obvious that "manage telemetry" is SDK content. We need "manage telemetry" for users who are new to opentelemetry and don't have intuition about what the sdk is.

One consideration is that we discussed adding a "Learn the Basics" / "Introduction" section, which will explain key concepts. If every new user first reads that content, then they'll learn that the sdk is used to managed telemetry, and we might be able to get away with omitting the "manage telemetry" portion of the title. The problem is not all users will read the "Learn the basics" / "Introduction" content. To what extent to we want to accommodate users who consume information out of order?

Reviewer 2: Moving this out into a dedicated discussion: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/discussions/5039

Author: Marking as resolved.

  `MeterProvider`, including tools for configuring metric streams and reading /
  exporting metrics.
- [SdkLoggerProvider](#sdkloggerprovider): The SDK implementation of
  `LoggerProvider`, including tools for processing and exporting logs.
- [TextMapPropagator](#textmappropagator): Propagates context across process
  boundaries.

These are combined into [OpenTelemetrySdk](#opentelemetrysdk), a carrier object
which makes it convenient to pass fully-configured
[SDK components](#sdk-components) to instrumentation.

The SDK comes packaged with a variety of built-in components which are
sufficient for many use cases, and supports
[plugin interfaces](#sdk-plugin-extension-interfaces) for extensibility.

## SDK plugin extension interfaces

When built-in components are insufficient, the SDK can be extended by
implementing various plugin extension interfaces:

- [Sampler](#sampler): Configures which spans are recorded and sampled.
- [SpanProcessor](#spanprocessor): Processes spans when they start and end.
- [SpanExporter](#spanexporter): Exports spans out of process.
- [MetricReader](#metricreader): Reads aggregated metrics.

> - [MetricExporter](#metricexporter): Exports metrics out of process.

Reviewer 3: nit: is it always out of process, or typically out of process?
(Eg: InMemoryExporter)

Author: Typically out of process. Although InMemoryExporter is a special case, and maybe the only exception to the rule. It may be better to generalize to avoid burdening readers with understanding the exception cases, given that this is a terse summary sentence.

Reviewer 3: (There was some zpages thing in the past as well.)

Reviewer 2: can this conversation be resolved?

    logger.log(Level.INFO, "shutting down");
    return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
  }

  @Override
  public AggregationTemporality getAggregationTemporality(InstrumentType instrumentType) {
    // Specify the required aggregation temporality as a function of instrument type
    return AggregationTemporalitySelector.deltaPreferred()
        .getAggregationTemporality(instrumentType);
  }

  @Override
  public MemoryMode getMemoryMode() {
    // Optionally specify the memory mode, indicating whether metric records can be reused or must
    // be immutable
    return MemoryMode.REUSABLE_DATA;
  }

  @Override
  public Aggregation getDefaultAggregation(InstrumentType instrumentType) {
    // Optionally specify the default aggregation as a function of instrument kind
    return Aggregation.defaultAggregation();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### Views

[Views](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-metrics/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/metrics/View.html)
allow metric streams to be customized, including changing metric names, metric
descriptions, metric aggregations (i.e. histogram bucket boundaries), the set of
attribute keys to retain, etc.

> {{% alert %}} Views have somewhat unintuitive behavior when multiple match a

Reviewer 3: :100: love the wording here!

- [Resource](#resource) the resource metrics are associated with.
- [MetricReader](#metricreader) to read the aggregated state of metrics.
- [MetricExporter](#metricexporter) to export metrics out of process, and which
  are associated with `MetricReader`s.
- [Views](#views) to configure metric streams, including dropping unused
  metrics.

The following code snippet demonstrates `SdkMeterProvider` programmatic
configuration:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/SdkMeterProviderConfig.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.sdk.metrics.SdkMeterProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.metrics.SdkMeterProviderBuilder;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.resources.Resource;
import java.util.List;
import java.util.Set;

public class SdkMeterProviderConfig {
  public static SdkMeterProvider create(Resource resource) {
    SdkMeterProviderBuilder builder =
        SdkMeterProvider.builder()
            .setResource(resource)
            .registerMetricReader(
                MetricReaderConfig.periodicMetricReader(
                    MetricExporterConfig.otlpHttpMetricExporter(

>                         "http://localhost:4318/v1/metrics")));

Author: @open-telemetry/docs-maintainers - these code snippets are great, really transforms how I think about writing docs knowing that I can write / maintain snippets which are well formatted and which I know will compile. 

One thing I find myself wanting is a link to source code where the snippet actually lives. In instances like this, it's nice for the user to be able to go look at the source code to see what `MetricExporterConfig.otlpHttpMetricExporter` does. I keep it as a separate function in a separate file to avoid repeating the content which lives down in the `#### Metric Exporter`. 

Is this something you've thought about? Seems like the code-excerpt tool would have access to the information necessary to add a link to source.

Reviewer: If you can open an issue to capture that need, I can look into it some time this fall when I get back into code-excerpt tooling support.

Author: 👍 Opened #5024 to track.

    ViewConfig.dropMetricView(builder, "some.custom.metric");
    ViewConfig.histogramBucketBoundariesView(
        builder, "http.server.request.duration", List.of(1.0, 5.0, 10.0));
    ViewConfig.attributeFilterView(
        builder, "http.client.request.duration", Set.of("http.request.method"));
    return builder.build();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### MetricReader

A
[MetricReader](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-metrics/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/metrics/export/MetricReader.html)
is a [plugin extension interface](#sdk-plugin-extension-interfaces) which is
responsible for reading aggregated metrics. They are often paired with
[MetricExporters](#metricexporter) to export metrics out of process, but may
also be used to serve the metrics to external scrapers in pull-based protocols.

> Metric readers built-in to the SDK and maintained by community in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Metric readers that are built-in to the SDK and maintained by the community in
```

`opentelemetry-java-contrib`:

| Class                  | Artifact                                                                           | Description                                                                      |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `PeriodicMetricReader` | `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}`                       | Reads metrics on a periodic basis and exports via configurable `MetricExporter`. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `PeriodicMetricReader` | `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}`                       | Reads metrics on a periodic basis and exports them via a configurable `MetricExporter`. |
```

  }

  @Override
  public AggregationTemporality getAggregationTemporality(InstrumentType instrumentType) {
    // Specify the required aggregation temporality as a function of instrument type
    return AggregationTemporalitySelector.deltaPreferred()
        .getAggregationTemporality(instrumentType);
  }

  @Override
  public MemoryMode getMemoryMode() {
    // Optionally specify the memory mode, indicating whether metric records can be reused or must
    // be immutable
    return MemoryMode.REUSABLE_DATA;
  }

  @Override
  public Aggregation getDefaultAggregation(InstrumentType instrumentType) {
    // Optionally specify the default aggregation as a function of instrument kind
    return Aggregation.defaultAggregation();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### MetricExporter

A
[MetricExporter](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-metrics/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/metrics/export/MetricExporter.html)
is a [plugin extension interface](#sdk-plugin-extension-interfaces) responsible
for exporting metrics out of process. Rather than directly registering with
`SdkMeterProvider`, they are paired with [PeriodicMetricReader](#metricreader).

> Metric exporters built-in to the SDK and maintained by community in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Metric exporters that are built-in to the SDK and maintained by the community in
```

    logger.log(Level.INFO, "shutting down");
    return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
  }

  @Override
  public AggregationTemporality getAggregationTemporality(InstrumentType instrumentType) {
    // Specify the required aggregation temporality as a function of instrument type
    return AggregationTemporalitySelector.deltaPreferred()
        .getAggregationTemporality(instrumentType);
  }

  @Override
  public MemoryMode getMemoryMode() {
    // Optionally specify the memory mode, indicating whether metric records can be reused or must
    // be immutable
    return MemoryMode.REUSABLE_DATA;
  }

  @Override
  public Aggregation getDefaultAggregation(InstrumentType instrumentType) {
    // Optionally specify the default aggregation as a function of instrument kind
    return Aggregation.defaultAggregation();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### Views

[Views](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-metrics/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/metrics/View.html)
allow metric streams to be customized, including changing metric names, metric
descriptions, metric aggregations (i.e. histogram bucket boundaries), the set of
attribute keys to retain, etc.

> **NOTE:** Views have somewhat unintuitive behavior when multiple match a

Reviewer 4: this might make sense to put in an info block to highlight

particular instrument. If one matching view changes the metric name and another
changes the metric aggregation, you might expect the result to be that the name

> and aggregation is changed, but this is not the case. Instead, two metric

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and aggregation are changed, but this is not the case. Instead, two metric
```

      SdkMeterProviderBuilder builder, String metricName, List<Double> bucketBoundaries) {
    return builder.registerView(
        InstrumentSelector.builder().setName(metricName).build(),
        View.builder()
            .setAggregation(Aggregation.explicitBucketHistogram(bucketBoundaries))
            .build());
  }

  public static SdkMeterProviderBuilder attributeFilterView(
      SdkMeterProviderBuilder builder, String metricName, Set<String> keysToRetain) {
    return builder.registerView(
        InstrumentSelector.builder().setName(metricName).build(),
        View.builder().setAttributeFilter(keysToRetain).build());
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### SdkLoggerProvider

[SdkLoggerProvider](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-logs/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/logs/SdkLoggerProvider.html)
is the SDK implementation of
[LoggerProvider](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/logs/LoggerProvider.html),
and is responsible for handling log telemetry produced by the log bridge API.

`SdkLoggerProvider` is configured by the application owner, and consists of:

> - [Resource](#resource) the resource logs are associated with.
> - [LogRecordProcessor](#logrecordprocessor) to process logs when they are
>   emitted.
> - [LogRecordExporter](#logrecordexporter) to export logs out of process, and
>   which are associated with `LogRecordProcessors`s.
> - [LogLimits](#loglimits) for controlling the limits of data associated with
>   logs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Resource](#resource) - The resource that the logs are associated with.
- [LogRecordProcessor](#logrecordprocessor) - Processes logs when they are
  emitted.
- [LogRecordExporter](#logrecordexporter) - Exports logs out of process, and
 are associated with `LogRecordProcessors`s.
- [LogLimits](#loglimits) - For controlling the limits of data associated with
  logs.
```

configuration:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/SdkLoggerProviderConfig.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.sdk.logs.SdkLoggerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.resources.Resource;

public class SdkLoggerProviderConfig {
  public static SdkLoggerProvider create(Resource resource) {
    return SdkLoggerProvider.builder()
        .setResource(resource)
        .addLogRecordProcessor(
            LogRecordProcessorConfig.batchLogRecordProcessor(
                LogRecordExporterConfig.otlpHttpLogRecordExporter("http://localhost:4318/v1/logs")))
        .setLogLimits(LogLimitsConfig::logLimits)
        .build();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### LogRecordProcessor

A
[LogRecordProcessor](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-logs/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/logs/LogRecordProcessor.html)
is a [plugin extension interface](#sdk-plugin-extension-interfaces) with a
callback invoked when a log is emitted. They are often paired with
[LogRecordExporters](#logrecordexporter) to export logs out of process, but have
other applications such as data enrichment.

> Log record processors built-in to the SDK and maintained by community in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Log record processors that are built-in to the SDK and maintained by the community in
```

`opentelemetry-java-contrib`:

| Class                      | Artifact                                                     | Description                                                             |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `BatchLogRecordProcessor`  | `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}` | Batches log records and exports via a configurable `LogRecordExporter`. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `BatchLogRecordProcessor`  | `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}` | Batches log records and exports them via a configurable `LogRecordExporter`. |
```

    return BatchLogRecordProcessor.builder(logRecordExporter)
        .setMaxQueueSize(2048)
        .setExporterTimeout(Duration.ofSeconds(30))
        .setScheduleDelay(Duration.ofSeconds(1))
        .build();
  }

  public static LogRecordProcessor simpleLogRecordProcessor(LogRecordExporter logRecordExporter) {
    return SimpleLogRecordProcessor.create(logRecordExporter);
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Implement the `LogRecordProcessor` interface to provide your own custom log
processing logic. For example:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/CustomLogRecordProcessor.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.api.common.AttributeKey;
import io.opentelemetry.context.Context;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.common.CompletableResultCode;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.logs.LogRecordProcessor;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.logs.ReadWriteLogRecord;

public class CustomLogRecordProcessor implements LogRecordProcessor {

  @Override
  public void onEmit(Context context, ReadWriteLogRecord logRecord) {
    // Callback invoked when log record is emitted.

>     // Enrich the record a custom attribute.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // Enrich the record with a custom attribute.
```

    logRecord.setAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("my.custom.attribute"), "hello world");
  }

  @Override
  public CompletableResultCode shutdown() {
    // Optionally shutdown the processor and cleanup any resources.
    return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
  }

  @Override
  public CompletableResultCode forceFlush() {
    // Optionally process any records which have been queued up but not yet processed.
    return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### LogRecordExporter

A
[LogRecordExporter](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-logs/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/logs/export/LogRecordExporter.html)
is a [plugin extension interface](#sdk-plugin-extension-interfaces) responsible
for exporting log records out of process. Rather than directly registering with
`SdkLoggerProvider`, they are paired with
[LogRecordProcessors](#logrecordprocessor) (typically
`BatchLogRecordProcessor`).

> Span exporters built-in to the SDK and maintained by community in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Span exporters that are built-in to the SDK and maintained by the community in
```

Author: A long time ago a really good writer drilled a principle into my head to omit any word which isn't explicitly needed. She had this set of common junk words to avoid, which included "that". It turns out sentences using "that" can almost always retain their meaning if you just delete the word, and doing so tends to result in better prose. 

I kept "the" for all the comments like this, but skipped "that are".

Reviewer 4: Makes sense to me. Thanks for sharing that principle, I will also use that approach going forward.
